>> Hi, I'm Dr. Fuhrman,
and I congratulate you
on your interest in achieving
great health and longevity.
The right food is truly
the best medicine.
And if you adopt the
principles I share with you
in this program, you
can prevent and even
reverse many chronic diseases,
such as heart disease,
diabetes, high blood
pressure, and why not get
your body in incredible health
and avoid the tragic diseases
that afflict most
everyone eating
the standard American diet?
The standard American diet,
abbreviated SAD, sad, isn't it?
The reality is that
the standard way
most people eat in the
United States today
virtually guarantees they
will develop heart disease
and cancer.
And it doesn't have to be you.
Nutritional science has
made dramatic strides
in recent years and by
utilizing the knowledge that I'm
going to share with you,
these health tragedies simply
do not have to happen to you.
During the course of my
medical practice, which
spans over 20 years and
over 10,000 patients,
I have observed the miraculous
power of superior nutrition.
By taking action now, you don't
have to have a heart attack,
you do not have
to have a stroke,
you do not have to get
demented when you get older.
You can apply modern
nutritional science
to earn a better, longer life.
On the other hand, most
Americans are in trouble.
We have the most
overweight population
in the history of the human
race and almost everyone
over the age of 60
is taking drugs.
You are what you eat.
And today, over 60%
of the American diet
is made up of processed foods,
such as cereals, white flour
products, candy bars,
oil, soft drinks,
and other sweetened and
salted refined foods.
About 30% of the American
diet comes from animal food,
so less than 10% of the
average person's diet
is derived from fruits,
vegetables, beans, nuts,
and seeds.
With a diet like this,
Americans are not
getting the micronutrients,
antioxidants,
and phytochemicals they need.
Micronutrients, which
are vitamins, minerals,
and phytochemicals, are
deficient in the diet
of most Americans.
Remember, both refined
foods and animal products
do not contain a significant
load of antioxidants
and phytochemicals.
Yet, these are the
micronutrients that
offer protection against both
heart disease and cancer,
and because of this,
about 40% of Americans
die needlessly of heart disease
and strokes, while about 30%
die of cancer.
Said in another way,
heart disease and cancer
are caused predominantly by a
fruit, vegetable, nut and seed
deficiency.
One of the biggest health
issues facing this country
is obesity and related diseases.
Not only do people have trouble
losing their excess weight,
but when they do lose some
weight counting calories
or points, in more than 95% of
cases, they gain it back again.
The popular diets are focused on
reducing calories, so reducing
carbohydrates, fats, proteins.
Of course, those macronutrients
are where calories come from.
Some popular diets attempt to
adjust the ratio of one calorie
source to another, more protein,
less carbs or more carbs
and less fat.
Now, while dieting may produce
short term weight loss,
they do not solve the problem
of food cravings and food
addictions.
Without meeting the body's
micronutrient needs,
people develop food addictions
and get an overwhelming desire
to consume more calories
and eat too frequently.
The diet cannot be maintained
long term against the backdrop
of unrelenting food cravings
and food addictions.
And any weight loss
is certain to return.
The problem is without
addressing the nutrient quality
of one's food choices, the
body remains unsatisfied,
and the drive to overeat
remains simply overwhelming.
The only effective
strategy for weight loss
that will be effective,
last forever, and result
in excellent health
is to consume
sufficient micronutrients found
in fruits, vegetables, beans,
nuts and seeds.
This strategy will
blunt your desire
for non-nutritious foods,
food cravings, and overeating.
In addition, a
micronutrient rich diet
reduces inflammation,
boosts the immune system,
and slows the aging process.
The most nutrient dense
foods are fruits, beans,
and vegetables, especially
green vegetables,
which are the foods most
missing in modern diets.
Nutrient dense foods contain
vital nutrients, vitamins,
minerals, and phytochemicals
essential for boosting
immunity, detoxifying the body,
and delivering permanent weight
loss.
But you must eat the real
foods to get the thousands
of nutrients food contains.
Processing and refining
foods destroys or removes
most of the fragile
protective nutrients.
Conversely, the standard
American diet, or SAD,
contains almost no disease
fighting and health
promoting antioxidants,
lignins, and phytochemicals.
In fact, an SAD
diet doesn't even
supply 1/10 the
micronutrients humans require
to prevent disease and
obtain excellent health.
Without those nutrients, we
promote cellular inflammation,
leading to heart disease and
brain disease, premature aging,
and of course overeating.
I hope this
presentation encourages
you to read one or
more of my books,
such as "Eat To Live"
or "Super Immunity,"
to gain a more comprehensive
understanding of all the food
factors that are so vital
to guarantee your success
and more of the
fascinating science.
We finish our formal education
at high schools and colleges,
and the most
critical knowledge we
need to protect our precious
health goes unmentioned.
I hope I can encourage
and motivate you
to become a nutritarian,
a person who
has a preference for foods
that are high in life
sustaining micronutrients.
Nutritarians eat lots of
nutrient dense healthy foods,
such as green vegetables,
fruits, beans, berries, nuts
and seeds, and they eat
less animal products
than conventional eaters.
They eat almost no white flour,
white sugar, and refined foods.
And lastly, I hope
you will come along
to see that this
new way of eating
can also be fun, delicious, and
a real blessing in your life.
Green vegetables are the most
critical missing elements
in modern diets.
Learning to prepare
and enjoy greens
is essential to creating
health and a body you love.
And when you nourish
yourself with greens,
you will naturally
and effortlessly
eat less foods that make
you sick and overweight.
Eating both raw greens
and cooked greens
are powerfully
protective against cancer
and extend your lifespan as they
encourage your ideal weight.
Nutritionally, greens are very
high in vitamins, minerals,
and phytochemicals, but they are
also high in protein and fiber.
When you taste some of my
favorite recipes for greens,
you might find that superfoods,
such as kale, collard greens,
bok choy, spinach,
and broccoli rabe,
can actually be prepared
to be a real treat.
Remember, once you
start to eat for health,
your food preferences
and tastes will change,
and healthy foods will gain
a new and delicious flavor.
Besides salads and the
green vegetable recipes,
greens are also great in soups.
When you steam or
boil vegetables,
some of the nutrients
get lost in the water.
But when we simmer
vegetables in soup,
all the nutrients are
retained in a liquid.
And making one big
pot of soup can
be used for a great lunch or
dinner for the whole week.
So a cornerstone of my
lifespan enhancing advice
is to have at least one large
salad as a main dish for lunch
or dinner and chew
it thoroughly to get
as much nutrition as possible.
Put a sign on your
refrigerator that says
the salad is the main dish.
You can get hundreds
of great recipes
for salads, greens, and
great soups in my books
or on my website
doctorfuhrman.com.
Welcome to Whole Foods,
my favorite store.
I'm looking around here,
and just saying, wow.
When we were kids, we didn't
have such a huge availability
of foods like this.
I mean, this is an
incredible blessing
we have in human history and
actually unique opportunity,
we could take advantage
of high nutrient foods,
and such a spectrum of
nourishment and nutrients
from all over the world.
This blessing is
enabling us to live
longer and better than ever
before in human history.
So welcome and
please join me as we
go through some of these great
tasting foods available to us
and some of the
advantages of eating them.
So let's start with
green vegetables,
because obviously,
green vegetables
score the highest on the
nutrient spectrum or the ANDI
score.
Cruciferous vegetables
in particular
have been shown to have
the most power to protect
against cancer.
The cruciferous
family of vegetables
are the cabbage and
broccoli family.
Over here, we have
some broccoli,
we have mache and watercress
and different types of cabbages.
But just look at
this for a minute.
Here we have some watercress.
Watercress, one of the
healthiest foods in the world,
and is a great salad vegetables.
You know, one thing
you want to remember
when we're eating
cruciferous vegetables,
like collard greens--
these are collard greens, kale.
Over here, we have some kale.
Bok choy, and here we
have some regular bok
choy with a big white stem
and the small green leaf
and some baby bok choy,
even with some more green.
And you know, bok choy has more
calcium per calorie than almost
any food, and it's also
a cruciferous vegetable
rich in phytonutrients
and isothiocyanates.
It's these
isothiocyanates, called
ITCs, that give cruciferous
vegetables their unique ability
to defend against cancer
and to detoxify the body
and to excite the DNA repair
mechanisms in the body.
And you know, the
best way to prepare
these cruciferous vegetables
like bok choy and collards
and watercress and
broccoli, the best way
to pair him is to eat
a portion of them raw
and chew them very well,
because the isothiocyanates
in the vegetables are liberated
when you crush the cell walls
and chew them very well.
So cutting them also helps
liberate those compounds.
So when I'm taking
the watercress,
for example, I want to cut
it up for my salad using
a sharp knife, and
you make cutting up
with very small pieces,
because the more cuts you make
in the watercress, the more
you create a chemical reaction
to liberate those beneficial
isothiocyanates, or ITCs.
So watch, I'm going to
slice this watercress
in very small little pieces.
I, of course,
dipped it in water.
I rinsed it off.
And now I'm slicing it
for my salad in very, very
small little pieces.
So when I take this
watercress, when
I take this chopped watercress
and put it on my salad,
I've already initiated
this chemical reaction,
because it's chopped watercress.
And don't forget
to chew the salad
very well because as
you chew the salad,
you liberate more of those
beneficial compounds.
I just remembered last night,
I made this delicious salad
where I shredded some cabbage,
I shredded some baby bok choy
in the salad raw, and I
put some watercress on top
with the lettuce and
tomatoes and cucumbers,
and I also took some
zucchini, which I steamed,
and I put that in
the salad, too.
Where's that zucchini
I had over here?
Give me a second.
Because what I wanted
to show-- here it is.
What I wanted to show you was
I cut the tip of the zucchini,
and I steamed the
zucchini in the pot whole.
In other words, don't
cut up the zucchini.
Steam it whole for just
about five minutes,
so it starts to soften.
Because if you cut it up,
the juices will come out,
and you'll lose some
of those nutrients.
After it's cooked,
and it's still firm,
then you take this
cooked zucchini,
and you cut it right
down the middle.
And then you can slice
it like a cucumber.
So now my zucchini
is cooked, and I
have this sliced
zucchini, and I sprinkle
this right on top
of my salad that
was cooked zucchini
on top of the salad
with the other raw vegetables.
And I put on this
delicious dressing
that I made with a
tomato and mushroom sauce
with a little vinegar mixed
in and a little almond
butter mixed in and a
little bit of very finely
chopped red onion mixed
in with the salad,
and I chopped in a little bit
of chopped up, sliced olives
as well.
Had an incredibly
gourmet delicious salad.
But the key here is
when you eat a salad,
you want to chew these nutrients
very well, because most
people want to eat a
salad only get about 20%
the nutrients out of it, because
they don't chew it well enough.
So let me review that again, the
main points we just went over.
Number one, when it comes to
the cruciferous vegetables
like baby bok choy,
watercress, and kale.
Eat some raw.
Don't cook all of it.
Chop it up small.
Add it to your salad.
Cover it with a great dressing.
It's a great way you get those
anti cancer isothiocyanates
into you.
All right, let's move
on, because now when
we cook some of
these vegetables,
like kale, kale-- you
know, this is a superfood.
These are the foods that really
protect you against cancer,
and we're going to to
take some of this kale,
and let's add some
kale to our soup.
And don't forget, I did actually
take some kale yesterday
and put that and
used it in my lunch.
What I did with my
lunch with the kale
is I took some kale
raw, and I sliced it up
finally with my knife,
some finely chopped kale.
Remember, you want to make the
kale as small as you possibly
can.
And I put it in the
bottom of my soup bowl,
and I heated up that bowl of
soup, a delicious vegetable
bean soup with lots
of garlic and onion,
and I poured it right
over my raw kale.
So I used my raw kale to
add a little crunchy flavor
to the soup that we heated up.
But now, let's just review.
This kale, don't forget, one of
the most nutrient dense foods
in the world, scores 1,000
on the ANDI scoring system.
But here's how you
quickly prepare it.
You just take the leaves a
kale, grab it with your hand,
and just strip the leaves
and throw out the steps.
Just strip the leaves
right off with your hand,
throw out the stems.
First, of course,
you rinse it off.
And now, I'm going to take
my kale that's rinsed off
the stems, and I'm all set
to either steam the kale
or make it into the soup.
But let me give you a little
secret, a little tip, OK?
Because remember,
I said earlier,
that when I chopped up that
watercress really finally,
I was liberating
those isothiocyanates,
by chopping it, I was
creating a chemical reaction
that's occurring right
here in your kitchen,
right on your kitchen counter.
So you could take this kale, and
you can dump it in your super
or in your vegetable dish.
But if you chop it
up first, you're
actually going to
increase the compounds
in the biologic activity of
those anti cancer nutrients.
So here's what you do.
You chop up the kale, and
then you add it to the soup,
or you throw the
kale and your onion
and some bok choy
and other vegetables
right into a food
processor, and you make it--
you finely chop it, and then
you add it to your soup,
or you take your
kale, and you put it
in a big blender, or
the Vitamix machine,
and then you puree it with
little the soup liquid,
and then you add
it to your soup.
So here's the point
I'm making here.
The learning point is that
the more you chop and blend up
these green vegetables
before you cook them,
the more you liberate those
beneficial anti cancer
compounds.
They're still nutritious if you
cook them and then chop them
or if you let blend them in the
soup after they've been cooked.
But the secret
little tip here is
to chop them up is
fine as possible
first so they create
those compounds
and then the heat of
the soup won't interfere
with the formation
of those compounds,
because the enzyme in the
cruciferous vegetables
gets its fullest
activity to produce
those biological
anticancer compounds when
the food is still raw.
So we went over the
kale, how to chop it.
We went over finely
chopping watercress.
Parsley is not a
cruciferous vegetable.
Like there's some parsley here.
Like here's parsley
and here's parsley.
Parsley is not a
cruciferous vegetable,
but you still want to chop
it up fine for your soup.
You don't want a puree it.
Leave it crunchy.
And we have some
other things here,
some other herbs we can
use to spice up the soup.
Like watercress spices
up the soup, too.
Radishes and radish
tops are cruciferous.
They give the
super great flavor.
And dill.
Dill is a wonderful vegetable
and a wonderful spice
to add nutrients to your food.
What I do with dill is
I chop it up finely--
I chop it up very finely.
I don't blend it, because I
want it to be floating around
in that soup.
A great vegetable
to add to your soup,
and I always keep
some dill in the house
because I love to sprinkle
dill onto my squash dishes,
on baked potato dishes.
I love to use the dill
as a little flavoring
to sprinkle over the food
and even to put in sandwiches
or in whole wheat pita
pockets, where you're
stuffing in maybe
some green vegetables,
some shredded salad, some
avocado with a great dressing.
Dill's a wonderful thing to add.
All right, so we're going
through these green vegetables,
and let's touch base
on an artichoke,
because this really is one
of my favorite vegetables.
I can eat artichokes every
single night for dinner
and be satisfied.
You know, it's one of those
great vegetables that taste
great with nothing on them.
Let me quickly show you
how to make an artichoke,
because a lot of people aren't
familiar with artichokes.
They're very easy
to cook, and they're
delicious with nothing on them.
So you just pull off
some of the bottom stem,
the bottom pieces of the stem.
Preparing the artichoke,
just the very tip
of the bottom piece
I'm going to slice off.
And then-- because the
whole stem is edible
it's really delicious.
Now I'm going to slice
through the center
of the artichoke with my knife.
Just watch this
for a second, OK?
I'm going to cut right down
the artichoke because now
that I've cut through the
center of the artichoke
with my knife, without, of
course, cutting my fingers,
now the artichoke's going
to cook in under 15 minutes.
And you know how you know
when the artichoke gets done,
because I can take
one of these leaves,
and it rips right
off very easily
just by grabbing
it with the tongs
and pulling up and
shaking it, the leaf
will come off the artichoke
when the artichoke is cooked.
So that's how you know it's
cooked, takes about 15 minutes.
If you cook it this way,
it'll cook much faster,
and we take a small knife now--
let me find a smaller knife.
One second.
Here it is.
OK, now right in the
center of the artichoke
here is this like
peach fuzz material
that's not really edible,
and this lip right
under the peach fuzz, if this is
called the choke or the center
of the artichoke, this
is the most tasty part
and delicious part
of the artichoke.
To prepare this
nice and easy, there
is a lip right at the
edge of that fuzzy
stuff, which I'm
going to cut deeply
and right along that lip.
So give me a second here.
Let's cut this together, OK?
I'm going to put
my knife in there,
and I'm going to cut
right along that lip.
I can kind of feel when I got
to the bottom of that lip.
Then I can take the
center of these leaves
right here around that
fuzzy part of the artichoke.
I didn't cut deep enough.
Let me cut a little
deeper, so I can
feel I'm getting to
the bottom of that lip.
And then the center
part of the artichoke
should be able to
lift right out.
So now I lifted out the
center where this peach fuzz
was-- you see the fuzzy part.
This is not the good part.
This is not an edible
part of the artichoke.
And these small leaves
are like plastic
and sticky are not
very good inedible.
So I cut them out of the
center of the artichoke.
So now when I put the
artichoke in the pot,
I steam it with this open
spot in the middle right,
and then these leaves
right above the center
of the artichoke, these little
baby leaves that get cooked,
are the most delicious
and delectable part
of that artichoke.
This gets soft.
These little leaves get soft.
And the whole leaf is edible.
You can just put
this in your mouth
and chew the whole leaf up.
And the center part
of the artichoke--
and don't forget
these outer leaves
pull right off once it's cooked.
And this center
point right here,
which I'll just cut
those outer leaves off
right now to show you.
OK, so then once the
artichoke is cooked,
you have this center
part of the artichoke,
and the whole thing is edible.
So you eat all this
piece of the artichoke,
and you eat the whole stem, too.
So here you have
a green vegetable
that's really solid, adds
some sustenance to your meal.
Eat a couple the
artichokes, it fills you up.
Great amount of fiber, great
amount of phytochemicals.
And then the outer leaves,
these heavy outer leaves,
if you notice they have--
they get soft, and the underside
and the bottom of the leaf
gets edible, becomes
soft and edible.
So you put it in your mouth,
or you could take a knife,
you can hold it like this, and
put a knife down, and pull it
along the knife, and you'll
shave the edible part out
of the artichoke.
Or you can put it in your
mouth and pull it down
with your teeth, and it's
soft, it tastes really good.
Tastes good now
even when it's raw.
And you can eat this
part of the artichoke.
It's terrific.
So literally, you ate the
stem, you ate the leaves,
you ate the center part, and
you dumped out that little fuzz
part.
You know, artichokes taste
pretty good raw, too.
But you know what I do
with a lot of artichokes,
we cut up a lot of this
part, and we bake them into--
we take the artichokes
with oats and beans,
and we make them into
burgers, make them
into types of vegetable loaves,
whole bunch of exciting recipes
and where you can use
artichokes in your cooking.
Vegetables, in general,
offer strong protection
against cancer, not only the
green vegetables, but also
those low calorie vegetables
that are not green,
such as eggplant, mushrooms,
tomatoes, onions, garlic,
peppers, water chestnuts,
spaghetti squash,
and hearts of palm.
These colorful
vegetables not only
prevent chronic diseases,
such as high blood pressure
and heart disease, they can
even help you reverse high blood
pressure and heart disease.
Remember, if you
desire to lose weight,
the more raw vegetables and
these low calorie vegetables
you eat, the more
weight you will lose.
Then when you add low calorie
fruits, such as berries,
oranges, grapefruit,
cherries, and pomegranates,
you not only satisfy
your natural sweet tooth,
but you also protect yourself
against many cancers.
Berries, in particular, are an
excellent, nutrient dense, low
calorie source of vitamins
and phytochemicals
that have anti aging and
brain protective effects.
Frozen fruits and
frozen vegetables
are a convenient substitute and
have a high nutritional value.
Frozen fruits are
great when making
a healthy and delicious smoothie
or a cool creamy sorbet.
So eat two or three fresh fruits
with your breakfast and one
or two other servings of
fruit with lunch or dinner.
Try lots of my vegetable
recipes and add a wide variety
of vegetables to your diet,
especially tomatoes, mushrooms,
eggplant, peppers, and
onions, and continue
to have a large salad
before dinner every night,
and chew it thoroughly.
And remember, the salad is the
main dish, so eat as much of it
as you can.
Let's talk about the nutritional
value of these fantastic foods
that are great for our health
and make food taste great.
I mean, these are
things you want
to add to soups and salads,
and people aren't aware,
for example, that mushrooms
have tremendous anti cancer
properties and are full of both
discovered and undiscovered
nutrients.
But remember, mushrooms
are best cooked,
because some of those little
those light amount of toxins
in mushrooms are
actually dissipated when
you heat or cook the mushrooms.
And also remember that there are
different types of mushrooms.
There's white button mushrooms.
They're small white mushrooms.
There's these brown
mushrooms that
grow up and become portobellos
when they get bigger.
And these mushrooms are healthy,
so chop them up and add them
to your soup.
I mean, here we have
some morel mushrooms.
These are dried morel mushrooms
and porcini mushrooms.
You can buy them very
inexpensively dried
and add them to your soups.
Just chop them up and
throw them in your soups.
And here we have
maitake mushrooms.
Maitake mushrooms
are very powerful,
very good for your health.
The whole mushroom is edible.
You just rinse it off the stem,
the small pieces on the top.
You just chop them up and
when you get to the stem,
you chop it up smaller.
And you don't
blend the mushrooms
like you do with the greens or
some of the other vegetables.
You want to have them be lumpy
and chunky in your soups,
just like this.
And then of course,
these shiitake mushrooms.
So this is the
maitake mushrooms,
and these are the
shiitake mushrooms.
They're a little tougher.
Even the stems of the
shiitake mushrooms
are really rough,
rough and tough,
but they're great in your soup.
They give a chewy feel,
so you cut them up--
so cut up the mushroom,
and then slice up
that stem of the shiitake
mushroom in very small pieces.
They're like little
flavorful beans in the soup,
absolutely delicious.
And here we have some
royal trumpet mushrooms.
And royal trumpet, they're
shaped like a trumpet,
the stem as you can
see is pure white,
and it can be chopped up and an
excellent flavor to your soups
and vegetable dishes.
And these are great.
These mushrooms are
great when you saute them
in garlic and onion
with your baby bok choy.
So bok choy and cabbage can
be sauteed in a little tomato
sauce or tomato juice with
garlic, a little nutritional
yeast, little spices and
flavorings with the mushrooms
makes a delicious side dish.
And also, what's a great
flavoring for vegetables,
of course, is sun
dried tomatoes.
So moving away
from mushrooms, we
put the fresh tomatoes,
which as you know,
tomatoes protect you against
cancer, like prostate
cancer and breast cancer.
They contain a carotenoid
called lycopene,
and they also-- tomatoes also
contain a unique carbohydrate,
and this unique
carbohydrate in tomatoes
has been shown to be protective
against unusual types
of cancer, like breast
cancer, like cervical cancer,
like ovarian cancer.
Tomatoes are a wonderful
nutritious food.
And you know what?
That special carbohydrate in
tomato with its anti cancer
effects, build up more
and get more absorbable
when you eat sun dried tomatoes
and you then rehydrate them.
So you buy these
sun dried tomatoes,
and what we do is we take
the sun dried tomatoes,
and we rehydrate them
by soaking them in water
in a plastic container
in your fridge.
You rehydrate them,
and you take them out
after they've been
softened by rehydration.
And then you slice
them into small pieces.
So you slice these
tomatoes into small pieces,
and you have these sun dried
tomatoes that were hard,
and now they're
softer and rehydrated,
and you can add
them to your salads.
You can sprinkle them on
your vegetable dishes.
You can throw sun dried
tomatoes, even not rehydrated,
into the soups for cooking.
But sun dried tomatoes
rehydrated give you
a large amount of these
special protective nutrients
and a large amount of lycopene.
And they add a special gourmet
flavor to much of your dishes.
OK, now no vegetable
dish would reach
its limit of
delectable perfection
without the use of
garlic and onion.
And the garlic and
onion family are
very rich in flavonoids and
phenols, which also protect you
against cancer
and heart disease.
They have anti-inflammatory
effects in the body.
They're very important
nutritious foods.
Interestingly, here of
course at Whole Foods,
we have white onion, yellow
onion, red onion, shallots.
Of course, we have
leek, which is
in the onion family,
scallions, and you
can notice that leak
and scallions are
a green vegetable, and also,
they're in the onion family.
So they're very rich and
find all types of nutrients,
as well as these special
phenols and flavonoids, so very
powerful nutrient rich foods.
Now, don't forget, like the
green cruciferous vegetables,
when you cut the onion, you
form a chemical reaction,
because an enzyme is released,
and the release of the enzyme
causes the sulfur
compounds to be formed.
Now the sulfur compounds
can get in your eyes
and cause your eyes
to tear, and it
causes actually sulfuric
acid in your eye
when it hits the
wet of your eye,
and that can cause burning of
your eyes, causing tearing.
So we want to show you
how to cut an onion
to minimize hearing,
but to maximize
the production of these
beneficial compounds that
prevent cancer, all right?
So OK, don't forget
now the white onion
is not as nutritious as the
yellow onion or the red onion.
So the red onion
and the yellow onion
are much more nutritious
from the white onion,
have twice as much
bioflavonoids and phenols
in the colored onion.
And the onions with the most
bioflavonoids and phenols
are the little baby
onions, the shallots,
super healthy, high nutrient,
anti cancer foods here.
Now, the secret to
cutting an onion,
not to have yourself tear,
is to make the onion cold
before you cut it, because
when it's at room temperature,
it gives off more gas.
So what you want to do is
you want to refrigerate
the onion for a while.
Better yet, you only
have to drop the onion
in the freezer for five
minutes before you cut it,
and it won't give
off all that gas,
and you won't make
your eyes tear.
Now, at the root of
the onion right here,
the root part is the part which
has more biologic activity.
Now, some people say,
cut the root out.
They say cut a circle around
the onion and remove that root,
so it won't make your
eyes tear as much.
I'm not telling you
to do that, because we
want those chemicals, right?
We want those bioflavonoids.
We want the sulfur compounds.
So you don't want to remove
the part of the onion that
makes your eyes tear the most.
You want to eat it.
So you could put a fan to
blow the gas away from you
as you're cutting the onion.
That works very well, too.
Some people can--
but the simplest way
to do it is to cut the onion
with the root facing away
from you, of course, the part
where all the chemicals are
going to come out, and
also just to make the onion
cold before you cut it.
So let's take this onion.
We're going to cut off the
bottom part right here.
I'm going to cut
off the top part.
I'm going to put a-- and I
didn't cause any tearing right
now because it's
away from my body.
I'm going to put a little
slit on the side of the onion.
So I'm going to
remove the outer skin.
Remove the outer
skin of the onion,
and my onion's ready to go.
Now, here's the question.
The onion is ready to
go, didn't cause tearing.
Should I drop this
whole onion in a soup,
cook it up, and then get
soft and mushy, throw it
in my blender to
give the soup flavor?
Should I do that or not?
And the answer is no, you
don't really want to do that.
You know why?
Because that will kill the
biological enzymes in the onion
that cause these
compounds to be formed
that fight against cancer.
So if you cut the onion
first before you put it
into the soup, you get 10 times
the cancer fighting activities.
Now, here's the bottom
of the onion, right?
That's the part where
most of the chemicals are.
So I'm going to cut that onion.
I'm going to face it
away from my body.
And I'm going to slice the
onion with the bottom part away
from my body.
And if the onion was cold
before I cut it, of course,
it would create less tearing,
but I'm not that close to it,
right?
So make believe I cut
up the whole onion,
and now I can slice it and add
it to my soup in little chunks.
Just this slicing of the onion
and cutting it up like that
and then adding it to my soup.
See now it's raw, right?
It's raw.
All those chemical reactions
occurring right now, right?
And don't forget,
this white onion
doesn't have as much sulfur as
the yellow or red onion does,
but I'm OK.
I'm not crying, am I?
All right, so you want to cut
it and then add it to the soup,
right?
Or you could take the onion
out-- you could take the onion
and you just make
one or two slits,
drop it in a food
processor or a blender,
throw some cruciferous
vegetables in with it.
Ladle a little
liquid from the soup
and turn on your blender or your
food processor, your Vitamix
machine, make it give off
that smell, create that gas.
That gas that's
being produced is
showing you're creating
great beneficial nutritious
compounds, OK?
All right.
So we went over
onions, scallions, too.
Don't forget, you want
to chew them well.
You cut scallions that are
already grouped together.
You cut the bottom off.
You cut the top off
and the whole rest
is edible for the soup.
Do we want to chop
this up smaller
or blend it before we
put it in the soup?
Sure we do.
Same thing with a leek.
Now leek are a great
thing to add to your soup.
Let me show you quickly
how to make a leek, OK?
Here's a smaller one.
First thing we do to cook with
leek is we chop the bottom off.
Cut that bottom part right off.
OK, throw away the root.
Take the top piece of the
leek right where it's been cut
and cut that part and
throw that away, too.
Right now, here's
the part of the leek
I'm going to use, right?
Very easy to make a leek.
The thing to remember
when cooking with a leek
is that a lot of leeks
have a lot of dirt inside.
So we take the leek, and
we make a slice right
down the center of the leek.
Now I've cut the
leek into two pieces,
and you can easily
unravel the leaf.
See the dirt in the leaf?
See that in there?
You want to unravel
the leek, because you
want to be able to clean it
well, to remove the dirt.
If you threw the leak
in whole in your soup,
you'd get a lot of
sand in your teeth.
So look, you see I'm unraveling
the leek, peeling it all open.
I'm going to throw this
in a big pot of water,
in a big part of cold
water to be able to remove
the dirt from the leek.
Then I take my leeks
that are clean now,
it's cut and cleaned, do
I dump them in the soup?
Nope.
First you want to chop them up.
You want to chop them
up before you cook them.
How come?
Because those enzymes,
which are heat sensitive,
you don't want to deaden them
with the heat of the soup.
You want them to be active
while you're cutting them.
And as you're
cutting this leek up,
you're creating a
chemical reaction that's
liberating those compounds.
Better yet, while it's raw--
and once you put the onion
family into the soup,
the heat doesn't destroy
the beneficial compounds.
They're still there.
See, the heat doesn't
destroy the compounds.
It just prevents the enzymes
from forming the compounds.
That's pretty-- you
understand that?
Really interesting stuff.
OK.
So let's go on.
We finished mushrooms.
We finished onions, the onion
family and tomatoes, right?
Let's move on to corn and
carrots, because likewise,
corn and carrots also contain
beneficial carotenoids
that have anti cancer effects.
And it's this unique ability
that we have in modern America
with so much opportunity
of different foods,
we could mix together
tomatoes, carrots, mushrooms,
onion family with the green
leafy cruciferous family
as well.
That's what gives us that
total combination of nutrients.
That full spectrum of
anti cancer nutrients
give us the most
nutritional power
to protect us against
those diseases.
So let's take some raw corn, OK?
So raw corn, we're going
to split the raw corn down
the middle, take a
look at this corn.
Yellow corn, white
corn, speckled corn.
And let's taste it raw, because
when we taste the corn raw,
we can tell how fresh
and sweet it is.
I'm going to eat a little corn.
This is really good.
Actually, I'm going
to eat some more.
I'm hungry.
Wow.
Corn is pretty good
raw. but you know
what, now I know I want
to buy a lot of these corn
today, because I know it's
sweet, I know it's fresh.
Instead of buying two or three,
I'm going to buy 24 of them,
because my kids will
eat them like candy.
My kids will eat them.
And you know what we'll do,
because the corn is so sweet
today, and because they
must've just picked it
in the last day or two.
If they picked it last week,
it wouldn't be this sweet.
What we're going to do is
we're going to actually husk it
in the store, because they have
a little garbage pail there,
so I don't have to
dirty up my kitchen.
I can take it here--
Whole Foods is so good.
They put a garbage
pail out there.
We can husk the corn in
the store right here.
And I can pack up about
24 of these ears of corn
to take home with me,
and I want to cook them--
I'll cook them all today.
You know why?
If I let him sit in my
refrigerator for two or three
days and lose their
freshness, they're
going to lose that sweetness.
But if I cook them all up,
some we'll eat tonight,
and we'll store them
cold, so once they're
cooked, that they'll
keep their sweetness.
Now, I'm giving you one other
little secret here, is that--
it's very important-- that
in corn is a special compound
called resistant starch.
It's higher in corn than in
most any other vegetable.
And that means the
resistant starch is enhanced
when you put the corn
in the refrigerator,
so when you took
the cooked corn,
and you put in your
refrigerator to get cold,
and you ate the cold
corn the next day,
there's even more resistant
starch in the cold corn
than there was in the hot corn.
And the resistant
starch is broken down
by bacteria in the
colon, and the bacteria
change that resistant starch
into a compound called
butyrate, which
fights colon cancer.
Pretty interesting, huh?
And you don't absorb all the
calories from resistant starch,
and it makes you lose weight.
Now, assume this
corn is now cooked.
Now that it's cooked, this
is what it can do with it.
I can take my knife,
and I can slice it down,
the cold cooked
corn down the edge.
And because the starch
became gummy from being cold,
the whole edge of the
corn will stick together,
instead of falling
apart like it is now.
You see how it's falling
apart into individual kernels?
Once I cook it, make it cold,
and I cut it down that lip,
this lip of corn will
stay together in a sheet,
and I could make sheets of
that corn to pack up in bags
or to give to kids to snack
on or to make in special--
to put in sandwiches and
things, stuff in pita.
So corn is a fun food.
All right, carrots.
Carrots also, they're
bundled together.
Keep them bundled.
If the string beans
come in a package
where they're all in a
line, keep them in line,
because now they're
easier to cut can cut.
I can cut top off with
one slice of the knife.
I can cut the whole top off.
Then take the rubber band off.
In other words, take the
top off, take the bottom of.
The last thing to do is take
the rubber band off, right?
And you know what I could do?
So now you're
going to wash them,
and you don't have to peel the
carrots you can just wash them.
One of my most favorite
thing to do the carrots
is to put them
through the juicer
and add them to soups to
add flavor to the soups.
So I'll juice tomatoes.
I'll juice carrots.
A lot of times when the
carrot juice comes out
of the juicer, what
I'll do is I'll
take the pulp that came
through the juicer,
I'll compact it and put the damp
pulp back through the juicer
again to get even
more juice out of it,
so you get all those beneficial
carotenoids out of carrots.
And don't forget, it's not
one food, one vegetable,
or one even type of
food that gives us
the incredible nutrient power
to defend against disease.
It's the synergy, the symphonic
effect of all these nutrients
put together in your body.
So bon appetit.
Have variety in your diet, and
enjoy these delicious fruits
and vegetables.
Let's go over some interesting
information and facts
about fruit, because fruit
are powerful foods that
protect your health, too.
They're particularly
protective against the type
of cancer called
squamous cell carcinomas.
In any case, some of my favorite
fruit, oranges, berries,
bananas, apples,
cherries-- just love fruit.
And you know what, you can mix
fruit in salads and mix fruit
in vegetable dishes, too,
to add interesting flavors.
Like take a plantation.
A plantation is one of these big
bananas that has a more tougher
consistency, and the
toughness, the fact
that it doesn't fall apart
as easily with cooking
makes it a great addition
to vegetable dishes.
So slice up that bok choy,
that cabbage, those tomatoes,
and cut up--
and you know, I like
to buy a plantain that
doesn't look bruised,
like this one,
and then leave it in my
house til it gets yellow.
And I love plantains.
I even love them when they
get really ripe looking
and a little soft.
And I'll slice them
down on both sides,
peel them back, and eat
them raw like a banana.
They're really delicious.
But because they're
tougher than the banana,
you can slice them up,
they won't fall apart.
They'll keep their consistency.
And now I can use these chopped
plantains in my vegetable dish,
and they won't get all crumbly.
They'll stay a little
banana flavoring.
They're delicious.
And you can wok them,
and you can bake them.
You can even bake them
when you're baking things
like squash, butternut
and acorn squash,
and you put a little
apricot, raisin, walnuts,
and chopped plantain in with
the squash when it's cooking.
Then you get it all out,
you mix it together,
absolutely delicious.
All right, let's
move on from bananas.
And also when you buy
bananas, everybody
knows to buy the bananas
when they're not ripe,
so they don't get bruised.
But as they start to ripen,
and you're eating them,
don't let them over ripen.
What we do is we
take the bananas
when they start to get ripe, and
we have too many ripe bananas
in the house, is we peel them
and we peel the ripe bananas,
put them in plastic bags,
and put them in our freezer.
So we always have a good stock
of bananas that are ripe,
that are then frozen,
which then you
can slice to make
banana ice cream out of
and banana sorbets and special
kind of treats and custards.
The greatest thing to do is just
to take a little frozen banana
out of your refrigerator,
and you just slice it up,
throw it in a blender
or food processor,
with a little soy
milk, a little hemp
milk, a little almond milk,
throw a couple cups of berries
in there, throw a few dates in
there, throw a little vanilla,
make all types of flavorings
ice creams and sorbets
and homemade pies with nut
bases that make delicious
treats from those
frozen bananas.
So you never have to worry
about throwing out a banana.
You freeze them before
they get to ripe.
Now, let's move on to mangoes.
I love mangoes.
And this store,
this is fantastic,
we got these tropical mangoes.
We have the Haitian
mangoes, my favorite mango.
You want to buy your mango,
of course, when it's firm,
and let it soften just
so it's a little soft.
If it gets too
soft, it can start
to get overripe and
start to ferment.
Are you guys familiar with
how to cook and eat a mango?
There's a lot of
different ways to do it.
The way I like to
do it quickly is
I take that pit that runs up
and down and is very narrow,
and I slice the mango
right alongside the center.
So I make two melon like
halves, which I can then eat.
There's different
ways to do this.
With a nice mango like this,
I can just take a spoon
and eat it with a spoon right
out the mango like this.
If I don't have a
spoon with me, I'll
just score the base of
a mango with a knife,
being careful not to
cut through to my hand.
See, no blood.
And I'll just cut it through,
score it close to the skin.
You could feel the
skin with the knife.
And now I can just pop the
mango inside out and just
eat it like this.
Great mango.
And of course, the
center part-- don't
want to miss the
part next to the pit.
Slice the edge of the pit and
peel back the edge like this.
And then once you took
the skin off the pit,
I can then slice it
with a knife, right?
I can slice the edges off around
the pit like this with a knife,
put them in my salad
or eat it plain,
or I can slice around
both sides, and cut it--
or I could just put
the pit in my mouth
and suck the juices out
right along the pit, one
of my most favorite foods.
And I'm sure they'll be one of
your most favorite foods, too.
Mangoes, too, can be added to
salads and vegetable dishes.
You can cook up vegetables
with mango and banana,
terrific tropical treat.
All right, let's move on.
Avocado.
Remember, we want to eat
less oil and less for those
fats coming from animal products
and prepared products and more
fat from natural whole foods.
Now, here's an
avocado, and this is
a Hass avocado, grown usually
in California or Mexico.
And these avocados, you buy
them green, and they're hard,
and they're not
edible like this.
Just like a banana, you
want to wait till it ripens.
And as the avocado
starts to darken
and starts to get a little
bit more rich color,
that's when it's
ripe and edible.
Now, this avocado
right here is too ripe.
I would not buy this
avocado probably,
because it's too high of a
probability of it getting
bruised or damaged in bringing
it from the store in all
the stuff in the bag.
I'd prefer to buy it with
a little mixture of green
and just a slight degree
of darkness into it
and let it ripen in my house.
I also like them better when
they're not quite so soft.
And what you do with the avocado
is when they start to get--
this is very hard, right?
When they start to just get
a little bit of pressure
to this, so you can feel
a little bit of softness,
just like the banana,
don't leave it out there,
outside of the refrigerator
so it ripens too much.
Take the avocado and put
it in your refrigerator,
not your freezer
like the banana,
just in the
refrigerator, and that
will halt the ripening
process and keep that
in the stage of the avocado
that you can enjoy the best.
Same thing with papaya.
Papaya is a great food,
and these large papayas
are really delicious.
They're low in calories,
high in nutrients.
And you want to buy a
little greener like this.
So it's firm, so
it won't bruise up.
And then wait till it starts to
get a little more yellow tinge.
You see how this papaya is
starting to ripen, starting
to just get a
little yellow in it?
And this one has
more yellow in it.
As it yellows, it gets a little
more that it gets softer,
and this probably is
good to eat right now.
So we cut the papaya in half.
We cut the tip off,
cut it down the middle,
and then we can see those--
the black seeds.
And this is obviously
a nice ripe papaya.
And we can take a spoon,
which I don't have right now,
and we can take the spoon and
just fillet out the center part
here, removing the
seeds without removing
too much of the papaya.
You remove those
seeds with a spoon.
And sometimes you
could use a soft knife,
like a butter knife, to get down
and get the rest of those seeds
out.
And then you have your
papaya ready to scoop out
with a spoon, or you
could slice it in strips,
like I'm doing right now.
And once it's sliced
in strips, you
can cut it down right along
the edge like a melon,
removing the skin, and slicing
it up to put in your salads
or to add your dishes.
Oh, everybody knows how
to peel an orange, right?
You just-- usually score
the top of the orange juice,
so you don't hurt your finger
getting it in to start it.
That's probably easier.
The first thing I do
whenever I peel an orange
is remove the top
portion, and then I
go around in a circular
motion, around the outside
of the orange, right?
This one was cut already, so
it has a little cut in it,
so it's not peeling as easy.
And then once I go around
the outside of the orange,
I work my way, my
finger underneath,
my thumb underneath right
towards the center piece
to pull out that center stem,
and your orange is peeled.
So that one was
cut a little bit.
So you can start the orange--
I'll show you again.
You start the orange to
make an easy peeled orange.
And of course, you can
juice oranges, too.
When you juice the
oranges, cut right
through the center that way,
not through the stem part.
But anyway, just start the
orange, go right to this pit,
and move around the outside
of the orange circular,
as you turn the orange.
And then when you get close
to the bottom like this,
you're getting close to
the bottom of the orange,
you reach your thumb towards
that stem, pull out the stem,
and the orange is peeled
pretty quickly and easily.
Got that?
All right.
Lastly, let's last
touch on melons.
This melon's very
smooth, white, and green.
The bottom part doesn't
give to the thumb,
not really ripe enough.
It'll be OK if I let it
ripen for a while my house.
But I prefer to look
for a sweeter melon,
and I can tell when
I pick out the melon,
it starts to have that
little film over it.
In other words,
it's not as smooth,
that little bit of roughness.
You can almost start to
smell the sweetness in it,
and a little bit of an orange
tinge some time in the base.
And when press on the base
of the melon, it gives.
My finger is going
in a little bit here.
This one will
ripen much quicker,
and it will probably be
sweeter because the melon is
what was picked a little
bit closer to a riper stage.
Beans and legumes are among
the world's most healthy foods.
They stabilize blood sugar,
blunt you desire for sweets,
and prevent mid
afternoon food cravings.
Dried beans are you most
economical, high nutrient food.
Beans are a wonderful way
to add high quality plant
protein to your
diet, and they're
high in iron, B
vitamins, and fiber.
And they're also so versatile
that they can add delicious
variety to many dishes.
Remember, eating less animal
protein and more plant protein
from greens, beans,
nuts and seeds,
are the key to a long
disease free life.
Animal protein
raises the hormone
in the body called IGF-1, or
insulin like growth factor 1,
which promotes breast
and prostate cancer,
while beans do the opposite.
Scientific research studies
indicate that eating beans
is linked to a longer lifespan.
There are so many beans to
choose from and so many ways
to prepare them.
You can soak dried beans in
water overnight in a glass jar
and then drain and rinse
them daily until they sprout.
Then store the sprouts in the
fridge and use them in salads.
Unsalted canned beans, available
in most health food stores,
are also great in salads, or you
can cook dried beans in water
and some seasonings on a low
flame for an hour until soft
and save them for use in salads
and cooked vegetable dishes.
But the easiest
way to make beans
is to add the dried beans
directly to your soups
when you're cooking them.
Now, some people have
trouble digesting beans.
Make sure you chew
them very well.
That's the most important thing.
So if you have a
problem with beans,
eat a smaller amount so
you do not have discomfort.
You see, if you eat a small
amount regularly and chew them
very well, over time
your body learns
how to digest them
better, and people
find they can eat more of
them without difficulty.
The smaller beans, like lentils,
adzuki beans, mung beans,
and peas digest most easily.
The pinto, kidney, navy, black
eyed peas, garbanzo, soy beans,
black beans are a
little harder to digest.
So eat beans daily in a
vegetable soup, in a salad,
or as an ingredient
in a dip or main dish.
Eat greens, eat the
non starchy vegetable,
such as mushrooms, peppers,
eggplant, and tomatoes.
Eat your fruit every day, and
also try to eat some beans.
There are some amazing
recipes with beans in my books
and on my website.
You may want to try a great bean
and mushroom burger and even
a healthy chocolate
bar made from blending
black beans with almond butter
dates and unsweetened cocoa
powder.
High fat plant foods contain
the essential fatty acids
that your body needs.
Keep lots of raw nuts
and seeds on hand.
Nuts and seeds pack a
powerful, nutritional punch,
and they satisfy hunger
better than oils,
because they're rich in
fiber and critical nutrients.
They not only have one
quarter of the calories
compared to an
equal amount of oil,
but they also contain fibers,
called sterols and stanols that
do not get absorbed into
the body and bind fat
into the digestive tract,
making all the calories
not biologically available.
Surprisingly, their
consumption is linked
to weight loss not weight gain.
People who eat
seeds and nuts daily
have a 60% lower risk
of fatal heart disease,
and in the scientific
studies, they
demonstrate reduced
risk of death
from all causes and
increased lifespan.
So remember, not all
fatty foods are unhealthy.
The fats and seeds in
nuts are very different
from refined oils, saturated
fats, and trans fats,
fats to avoid.
A diet that does not contain
some seeds or nuts in fact
is placing yourself
in needless risk.
Only eat raw and
unsalted nuts and seeds
and avoid those that are
assaulted and roasted.
A tablespoon of ground
flax seeds, hemp seeds,
or other seeds can supply
those hard to find omega
3 fats that protect
against diabetes,
heart disease, and cancer.
Seeds are also rich in lignins,
a type of fiber associated
with a reduced risk of both
breast cancer and prostate
cancer.
In addition, seeds are a good
source of iron, zinc, calcium,
potassium, magnesium,
vitamin E, and folate.
Most people think olive
oil is very healthful
given the often mentioned
benefits of the Mediterranean
diet.
But olive oil, like
all other oils,
has 120 calories per tablespoon.
And those calories
can add up fast.
Look, it's better to use olive
oil than butter or margarine,
but olive oil can easily
sanitize your attempts
to achieve a normal weight.
And oil does not contain
the nutrients, fiber,
and phytonutrients that are
found in nuts and seeds.
The traditional
Mediterranean diet
is rich in fruits,
vegetables, and beans.
But the Mediterranean
people of past years
ate some olive oil for
sure, but they also
worked hard in fields with
a heavy plow and digging
and planting, burning
the calories off.
Today, Mediterranean people
are overweight just like us.
They still eat
lots of olive oil,
but their consumption of
fruits and vegetables and beans
is way down.
Meat and cheese
consumption has risen,
and the physical activity
level has plummeted.
We don't want to emulate the
most fattening and unhealthy
part of the Mediterranean
diet, just because there are
some other redeeming qualities.
Now, healthy salads
are definitely
a way of life for people who
want to lose weight or improve
their health.
But many of the
benefits of the salad
could be lost when you
put those three or four
tablespoons of an oily
dressing on top, which
means people are adding
over 400 calories of oil
to 50 calories of
raw vegetables.
You might just as well
drink the dressing
straight from the bottle
and forget the vegetables.
So the point is be
careful with oil.
Those calories can add
up fast and sabotage
your good intentions
to drop a few pounds.
But the main other reason
to cut back on olive oil,
besides the calories, is the
powerful heart protection
you get when you eat more seeds
and nuts as your source of fat.
When you blend nuts and
seeds into dressings
with a little flavored vinegars,
little fruit or tomato sauce,
you receive dramatic
health benefits.
Remember, raw nuts and seeds
are rich in critical nutrients
and fibers and have only
a quarter of the calories
of an equal amount of oil.
Even though raw nuts
and seeds are healthful,
they still should be eaten
in limited quantities,
because unless you're
slim and athletic,
do not exceed two ounces
of raw nuts and seeds
daily, because
nuts and seeds have
about 175 calories per ounce.
Certainly start to cut
back on all oils, including
olive oil, because
it's really fattening,
and be careful not to exceed one
tablespoon of olive oil a day.
Even better, cut back
your oil even more
and try water
sauteeing and using
nuts and seeds blended with
fruits, tomatoes, vinegars,
and seasonings instead of
oil in your salad dressings.
Try some of my delicious salad
dressing recipes that use
nuts and seeds instead of oil.
Whole grains have been a
central part of the human diet
since early civilization.
Human species and
hunter gatherers
settle down into
farming communities
where they were able
to cultivate crops.
In the Americas, corn
was a staple grain.
In India and Asia, it was rice.
In Africa, people ate sorghum.
In the Middle East, they
used flatbread, tabouli,
and couscous.
In Europe, corn, millet
wheat, rice, and pasta.
In Scotland, oats
were the staple food.
And in Russia, they had
buckwheat and kasha.
So remember, there
is a difference
between whole grains, such as
buckwheat, oats, and wild rice
and the many overly processed
whole grain cereals, which
are so overly cooked
that they've lost
most of the nutritional value.
The cardboard box they're
packaged in likely
has more nutrients in it.
In fact, those refined
foods are often
dry baked to make
them crisp, which
results in the formation
of toxic compounds,
such as acrylamides.
So not only do these
grains have to be
whole grains and not refined,
but the way they are prepared
matters.
But when we're talking about
achieving dramatic enhancements
in longevity,
whole grains do not
contain enough cancer
fighting micronutrients
to be the major source
of calories in your diet.
Therefore, they do not show
the powerful protection
against cancer
and other diseases
that as apparent in scientific
studies of vegetables, beans,
raw nuts, and seeds.
When eating grains,
try soaking, sprouting,
or cooking your grains
in water instead
of eating precooked cereals
or baked flour products.
For example, steel cut
oats and wild rices
are healthy grain choices.
Remember, don't fall
for the trick thinking
it's a whole grain when
the ingredient says
wheat flour or
organic wheat flour,
which just means white flour.
It must say 100% whole
wheat or whole grain.
Otherwise, you can be sure it's
largely made of white flour.
So my recommendations are
to limit grain consumption
to about one serving per day,
perhaps as a water cooked
breakfast cereal
with fruits and nuts
or as the dinner side dish.
And you have gluten
sensitivities,
you can still
enjoy whole grains,
such as quinoa, millet,
brown and wild rice.
Let's go over some of the
benefits of these incredibly
interesting foods.
Let's take some beans first, OK?
Here we have adzuki beans.
They're very like
red kidney beans,
but they're smaller, so
they cook faster in a dish
and get soft faster.
And beans are a wonder
food, a wonder superfood.
They're so interesting,
because they've been
linked in a scientific study--
they've been linked
to enhance longevity.
If you're elderly, and you
eat beans on a regular basis,
you live longer, and they have
specially protective effects
against colon cancer.
This is how they work.
When you eat a bean,
not all the bean
gets digested fast, because
there are different types
of starch in a bean.
Some get digested much slowly.
There's something called slowly
digestible starch in beans,
and the body breaks
it down very slowly
so it keeps your blood
glucose stable for hours
and takes away your hunger.
There's also something in a
bean called resistant starch.
And believe it or
not, resistant starch
doesn't even get digested
in the intestines.
It goes to the colon
and gets broken down
by bacteria in the
large intestines.
When those bacteria
break down the bean,
they create short
chain fatty acid.
They break down the
resistant starch,
and they create short
chain fatty acids.
Now, the short chain
fatty acids produced
by the bacteria in the colon
feed back to the liver,
and they inhibit glycolysis,
which means they slow down
the use of glucose by
the body, which means,
again, you're not as hungry,
and you need less calories,
and they make you burn more fat.
So let me say that again.
When beans slow down glycolysis
and promote lipolysis,
it makes you burn fat,
makes you lose weight.
They take away your
hunger, and you're not--
and you're going to eat
less food, because they
make you feel so satiated.
And lastly, when you
look at a cup of beans,
and it says 200 calories
a cup, keep in mind
that a lot of those
starch calories
aren't going to get digested.
They're going to pass
down to the colon
and be broken down by
the bacteria there.
So it's really not
200 calories a cup.
They give you this sensation,
the feedback to your brain,
and your nervous system
that you ate 200 calories.
But in reality, over that
next digestive period
of a few hours,
you're only going
to digest about
150 those calories.
And then you have the
feedback of causing
you to increase your metabolism
and burn more fat the day
you eat them and
even the next day.
So here are the important
points when you eat beans.
The important points are,
eat a variety of beans.
Especially eat the dark beans,
like navy beans, black beans,
red kidney beans, cannoli beans.
Eat the variety of colors.
Don't forget the lentils, both
the green, the dark lentils,
and the brown lentils.
They're all excellent foods.
Split peas are also full of
resistant starch and very
healthy foods for
you to eat, always
great to add to your soups.
Now, these are dried beans.
The dried beans when
soaked and cooked
have a higher amount
of resistant starch
compared to canned beans.
So dried beans were
less expensive,
and they're also better for you
to make your own bean dishes.
So what I do is we soak
the beans overnight.
Next day we cook them up with
a little garlic and onion,
and then you save them cold,
cooked in the refrigerator,
so you can spoon
them onto your salads
and spoon them onto
your vegetable dishes,
or you can put them
dried as is and cook them
right in your soups.
All right, and the last
thing is with beans
is don't forget is that if you
have trouble digesting beans,
they cause a lot of gas, that
means you haven't been eating
them regularly.
So you get rid of that
excessive gas production
by eating a small amount
of beans twice a day.
As you eat the beans
on a regular basis,
a small amount with lunch and
a small amount with dinner,
your body builds
up the bacteria,
it gets used to digesting
them, and you no longer
produce so much gas.
So the beans are like a fuel
for those beneficial bacteria
and the digestive
tract that are also
important for your good health,
because nuts and seeds are
another superfood.
I mean, the whole
reason I want people
eat less oil in their diet
is so they can get that room
to put more calories from nuts
and seeds, like walnuts, Brazil
nuts, pistachio nuts,
an incredible superfood.
See that they're green, full
of bioflavonoids and plant
sterols.
Now here's the secret
here about nuts and seeds.
Because nuts and seeds have
been shown in scientific studies
to have a dramatic effect
at preventing heart attacks,
preventing cancer, and
halting sudden cardiac death.
Now, sudden cardiac death
is not a heart attack.
Sudden cardiac death is caused
by an irregular heartbeat.
And we're saying that
that nuts and seeds have
an antiarrhythmic effect
to stabilize the heart
rhythm, a super important food
for your overall good health.
So what do we do?
We put nuts and seeds in
our salads, for example.
We make dips out of
them for vegetables.
Like for example,
a hummus dip made
with sesame seeds, a
little garlic and scallions
and horseradish, maybe with
a little bit of chickpeas
mixed in, and maybe
bake up an eggplant
and make a dish with eggplant
hummus mixed in, with eggplant
and the chickpeas
and the sesame seeds
and grind it all up together.
You can make delicious
tasting dips and sauces.
Here we have that we got
right here in Whole Foods,
some ground hemp seed,
another superfood.
The flax seeds, the hemp
seeds, the sesame seeds,
the sunflower seeds are all
rich in the whole spectrum
of fatty acids, both
omega 3 and omega 6 fats
that are so good for your body.
And they contain lignins that
prevent cancer, especially
breast cancer,
and they prevent--
and they have sterols.
Nuts and seeds so your
richest source of sterols.
Now, sterols lower cholesterol.
Remember that we make actually
vitamin supplements that
are made from sterols so people
with high cholesterol levels,
so they bind the
cholesterol in the gut
and make your body
get rid of them.
But there's some new
findings about plant sterols
in the last year, and
that is that plant sterols
have dramatic effects at
protecting against cancer.
Let me say that one more time
because it's super important.
We're saying that the sterols
and the phytonutrients in nuts
and seeds don't only
protect your heart.
They don't only lower
your cholesterol.
They don't only add
soluble and insoluble fiber
to the bulk of your stool and
protect against colon cancer.
They also have dramatic effects
against all types of cancers,
because plant sterols
have tremendously powerful
anti cancer effects.
So nuts and seeds are superfoods
and without them in your diet,
you're just not
eating a healthy diet.
All right, let's move
on to whole grains.
Whole grains now, there's
something important
you have to know
about whole grains,
because they're healthy, too.
It's that you have
to eat whole grains
as much as possible intact.
We're talking about
intact whole grains,
because the more finely
you grind the grain,
it increases glycemic index, and
the more unhealthy it becomes.
So of course, we
don't want people
eating products in white flour.
That's like eating sugar, high
glycemic index, no nutrients,
like eating a candy bar.
Make sure when you're buying
breads and products made
from flour, if it says wheat
flour, that's not healthy.
That's a trick to make you
think it's whole wheat flour.
It has to say those three
words, whole wheat flour,
not just wheat flour, because
they can call white flour wheat
flour.
So if the first ingredient
isn't whole wheat flour,
don't buy it.
It's got to be the
first ingredient.
All right, even better,
flour still is not
as healthy as an intact grain.
So if you buy a
bread that's made
with sprouted grains
or intact grains
or partially ground grains,
it's even healthier.
For example, here's
like oat flour is not
as healthy as oatmeal.
It's not as ground up as much.
Oatmeal is not quite as
healthy as steel cut oats,
because steel cut outs
are the whole oat cut.
It's not as ground up,
or it's not as slivered
down as thin as oatmeal,
both healthy foods,
but steel cut oats has a lower
glycemic index and more zinc.
It's a healthier food.
Here's whole wheat berries.
This is what they grind
up to make flour from.
You can actually cook
with whole wheat berries
and add it to a vegetable dish.
It's healthier in the
berry form and not
in the wheat form and
still a very healthy food.
And you know what
you could do, you
could take these
whole wheat berries,
and you can partially grind
them in your food processor
or your Vitamix machine, and
you can partially ground them
so they're not as ground down
so much as the thin flour
they make out of bread,
and you could bake
your own healthier bread
with carrots, with zucchini,
with beets, with harshly
ground whole grains,
with raisin and
apple and cinnamon.
You can make delicious tasting
whole grains in your own house
by using whole grains.
Another great whole
grain is quinoa,
because quinoa is never ground.
It's a small grain.
It has a pasta like flavor, very
soft and chewy, but delicious
to mix in vegetable dishes.
And of course, brown
rice and wild rice,
and if you want to make
it more nutritious,
get more of the black and
wild rice in the blend,
because they have more
phytonutrients and more
resistant starch.
We talked about corn earlier.
Popcorn is a whole
grain, not talking here
about eating corn flour.
You can get a kind of
coarse kind of corn meal
that's better for
you than corn flour,
because it's more
coarse, and you
can make porridges
and cereals out
of that and vegetable dishes
out of that, like polenta.
And you could also make
dishes with popcorn
or just have popcorn as a snack.
You don't want to
fry it up in oil,
but you can use an air popper.
You could sprinkle
some nutritional yeast
and some seasonings on top.
You even put a little bit of--
take a little water and a
little bit of olive oil,
shake it together
in a spray bottle
and spray it on the
popcorn, sprinkle
some nutritional
seasonings, and you
have a great wholesome
treat for your kids.
All right, so to wrap
this up, remember,
the key to excellent
health is eating
the majority of your diet
from a whole nutrient plant
foods, fruits, vegetables,
beans, a lot of beans,
big assortment of nuts and
seeds, especially seeds,
and don't forget the
sesame seeds have
more sterols than any
other food, any other seed.
And sterols protect
against cancer.
So you want to use a lot
of unhulled sesame seeds.
And unhulled sesame
seeds have more calcium
than any other food,
much more even than milk.
So you want to blend up
those unhulled sesame seeds
into dressings and sauces.
And lastly, whole
grains, especially when
they're not finely ground,
and use them in your cooking,
and not just to make
pastries out of.
You can make great
tasting dishes out of them
that are still
wholesome and healthy.
Since fish is generally low
in saturated fat and high
in beneficial omega 3 fats, many
consider it an important part
of a healthy diet.
My message is that you still
have to be careful eating fish
because it's one of the
most polluted foods we eat.
In spite of the presence
of valuable omega
3 fatty acids called EPA and
DHA, all fish and shellfish
contains some mercury
and other pollutants.
When we eat fish, we have to
choose the species that are
cleaner and have less mercury.
Larger fish, who have
lived the longest,
have the highest
levels of mercury
because they have had more
time to accumulate it.
They may also accumulate it from
all the smaller fish they've
eaten, similar to the
way we accumulate mercury
in our tissues from
the fish we eat.
If you eat fish
regularly, your body
is likely to be high in mercury.
Subtle, cellular
damage from mercury
is a contributor to the
development of certain diseases
later in life.
High body stores of mercury
cause brain damage and memory
impairment, leading to dementia.
High mercury levels
can also contribute
to hypertension, heart
disease, mental disorders,
and endocrine diseases.
So my recommendations
are if you do
have fish, choose from the
lowest fat, lowest mercury
types, such as flounder,
haddock, salmon, sardines,
scallops, sole, and trout.
Never accept recreational
fish from questionable waters,
and never eat high
mercury containing
fish, such as blue
fish, mackerel, marlin,
sea bass, shark, swordfish,
tilefish, and tuna.
Lastly, do not have fish
more than twice a week.
While fish is certainly a
healthier choice compared
to red meat and
cheese, too much fish
is also associated with
negative health outcomes,
such as higher rates
of breast cancer
that is thought to be related
to the pollution in fish.
And remember, I want
animal products in general
to be reduced to a smaller
percent of our total calories,
because too much animal
protein, not just fat,
can have negative
health consequences,
such as osteoporosis and
raising the hormones that
promote cancer.
I strongly recommend that you
moderate your intake of animal
products and treat them more
like a condiment or small side
dish rather than as the
main part of the meal.
The main problem is
that animal products
lack the nutrients that protect
us against cancer and heart
attacks, fiber, antioxidants,
folate, carotenoids,
and phytochemicals.
In fact, as animal products,
they are rich in substances
that scientific
studies have shown
to be associated with incidences
of cancer and heart disease,
such as saturated
fat and cholesterol.
The nutritional scientists
now have their world
turned topsy turvy with
the recent findings
that increased amounts
of animal proteins
raise IGF-1 and may be a larger
factor in cancer promotion
than even animal fats.
The facts are diets that
are higher in vegetation
and lower animal products have
been shown to be protective
against heart attacks,
strokes, and cancers,
the leading causes of
premature death in America.
So I recommend limiting your
intake of animal products
to less than 10% of your
total caloric intake.
Full fat versions
of animal products,
such as cheeses and butter,
are very high in saturated fats
and should be avoided even more.
Instead, choose low fat or fat
free versions, low fat dairy,
white meat, wild meats.
Fish and egg whites are
generally preferred.
Americans right now
eat approximately 30%
of calories from
animal products.
This is way too
much, contributing
to our epidemic of heart
disease, strokes, and cancer.
A small amount a few times
a week won't be a problem,
but when people eat animal
products at almost every meal,
you can be certain
they'll develop
serious disease in the future.
Especially avoid processed
meats, hot dogs, bacon,
barbecued meats,
and luncheon meats,
as they have a high
level of cancer promoting
carcinogens, the strongest
link with cancer.
Keep in mind that green
vegetables, beans, seeds,
and nuts are also
high protein foods.
In fact, broccoli
has more protein
per calorie than a hamburger.
And when you get most of
your protein from plants,
your body gets flooded
with antioxidants
and other protective
micronutrients
without the cholesterol
and saturated fat
that are in animal products.
Then you can't
develop heart disease.
So the point here
is that we should
focus on the high
nutrient plant foods,
and then you automatically
get sufficient protein, even
if you eat no animal products.
So I recommend you
reduce animal products
to three small servings a week.
That means a total of
12 ounces per week.
Remember the salad and
the vegetable dishes
are the main dish.
So treat the animal
products as a side dish
or even a condiment to
your meal, possibly added
to the soup or a vegetable dish
in small amounts to add flavor.
And try many of my
gourmet vegetable recipes.
Let's review some of
the practical tips
to thrive with
superior nutrition.
Many people find
these tips helpful.
Put a sign on your
refrigerator that says
the salad is the main dish.
Set aside two evenings a week
to get most of the cooking, done
and make enough to have
leftovers for a few days.
Make the investment
in a powerful blender,
like a Vitamix, to use to
make the healthful dressings
dips, smoothies, and sorbets
into your diet style.
Try to eat your salad first.
Eat a salad with a nut based
dressing or raw veggies
with a dip to start
both lunch and dinner.
Get rid of the dangerous
food in your kitchen,
such as sweets, processed foods,
heavily salted foods to avoid
unnecessary temptation.
Make your home a
protected space.
Have cooked greens or greens in
soup at every lunch and dinner.
Remember the four S's,
smoothies, soups, salad,
and sorbets.
Have a fruit sorbet or a
fruit dessert after dinner.
Then clean the kitchen,
clean your teeth,
and end eating for the day.
So I hope you achieve
tremendous success following
my nutritarian diet style.
It's a blessing to eat
great tasting food,
to have great health, and
avoid medical tragedies,
such as cancer, heart
attacks, and strokes.
I encourage you to
learn more, to join
my community of nutritarians
at doctorfuhrman.com,
and join the support,
camaraderie, information,
and even the ability to interact
with me and my medical staff
to get all of your health and
nutrition questions answered.